
The previous chapter established that stress in Warlpiri is on the first syllable of a polysyllabic morpheme and on the first monosyllabic morpheme in a string of such morphemes. These facts are complicated by a few monosyllabic morphemes which do not conform to this pattern.
Three monosyllabic morphemes in Warlpiri attract stress in certain contexts. These are the infinitive /-nja/, the inceptive /-nji/, and the aspect clitic /ka/. The stress patterns involving these forms is dependent on the context. For instance, in a string of monosyllabic morphemes, the infinitive, inceptive or the aspect clitic will be stressed in preference to the first monosyllabic morpheme. This is shown in (páka)-rni-(njà-rla) 'hit-NPST-INF-SERCOMP', where the infinitive is stressed. However, these morphemes are not stressed if a polysyllabic morpheme follows.
The problem is to account for stress on the infinitive, inceptive and aspect clitic in contexts involving monosyllabic suffixes. The constraints introduced in Chapter 2 would ensure that in
69
70
words such as /paka-rni-nja-rla/, the first monosyllabic suffix is stressed and not the infinitive suffix /-nja/.
Since they attract stress in certain cases, I introduce a specific constraint requiring that they align with the left edge of feet. The constraint is incorporated into the system of constraint interaction which allows us to see what determines stress placement in wellformed outputs. In this system, the attraction of stress to these forms in certain contexts can be explained.
I show that an advantage of OT over other theories is a straightforward explanation for the contextual variability exhibited by such forms. This variability in OT can be said to result from priorities in the language expressed as constraint ranking.
The chapter is outlined as follows. In 3.2 the data on the infinitive and inceptive is presented. I provide an account of these patterns in 3.2.1. In 3.3, the discussion focuses on the patterns involving the aspect clitic which give the appearance of the clitic being a separate phonological entity from the stem to which it attaches. I consider whether words with once productive morpheme boundaries should be analysed as having lexical stress in 3.4, and in 3.5, the behaviour of a particular morpheme with regards to stress is examined in Martuthunira. In 3.6, some alternatives are considered followed by concluding remarks in 3.7.